README.md, before:

SolarEdge Monitoring
====================
This project enables monitoring the performance data of SolarEdge inverters and optimizers.
Solaredge supports the open Sunspec Alliance logging protocols, however this data is only 
accessible via an RS485 interface on the inverter and does not include module level (optimizer) 
data.  Solaredge publishes an API that allows access to their portal, however this 
also does not include module level data.

**semonitor.py** is a program that implements a subset of the SolarEdge protocol.  It can be 
used to parse the performance data that has been previously captured to a file, or it can 
interact directly with a SolarEdge inverter over the RS232, RS485, or ethernet interface.
Performance data is output to a file in JSON format.

**seextract.py** is a program that can extract the SolarEdge protocol messages from a PCAP
file that contains data captured from the network.

**se2state.py** follows a file containing JSON performance data and outputs a JSON file
that contains the current state of the inverter and optimizer values.

**se2csv.py** reads a file containing JSON performance data and outputs two separate comma delimited
files that contain inverter and optimizer data that is suitable for input to a spreadsheet.

semonitor.py
------------

SolarEdge inverter performance monitoring using the SolarEdge protocol.

### Usage 
    python semonitor.py [options] [datasource]

### Arguments
    datasource           Input filename or serial port.
                         If no data source is specified, the program reads from 
                         stdin, unless the data source type is network.
                         If a file name is specified, the program processes the 
                         data in that file and terminates, unless the -f option 
                         is specified, in which case it waits for further data 
                         to be written to the file.
                         If the data source corresponds to a serial port, 
                         process the data from that port.

### Options
    -a                   append to output file if the file exists
    -b                   baud rate for serial data source (default: 115200)
    -c cmd[/cmd/...]     send the specified command functions
    -d debugfile         where to send debug messages (stdout|syslog|filename) 
                         (default: syslog)
    -f                   wait for appended data as the input file grows 
                         (as in tail -f)
    -m                   function as a RS485 master
    -n interface         run DHCP and DNS network services on the specified 
                         interface
    -o outfile           write performance data to the specified file in 
                         JSON format (default: stdout)
    -r recfile           file to record all incoming and outgoing messages to
    -s inv[,inv,...]     comma delimited list of SolarEdge slave inverter IDs
    -t 2|4|n             data source type (2=RS232, 4=RS485, n=network)
    -v                   verbose output
    -x                   halt on data exception

### Notes
Data may be read from a file containing messages in the SolarEdge protocol that was previously created by 
seextract.py from a pcap file, or the output from a previous run of semonitor.py.  It may also be
read in real time from one of the RS232, RS485, or ethernet interfaces on a SolarEdge inverter.

Debug messages are sent to the system log, unless the -d option is specified.  If an error occurs
while processing data, the program will log a message and continue unless the -x option is
specified.

The level of debug messaging is controlled using the -v option, which may be specified up to
4 times:

    -v      log input parameters and file operations
    -vv     log incoming and outgoing messages
    -vvv    log the parsed data of incoming and outgoing messages
    -vvvv   log the raw data of incoming and outgoing messages
    
Messages logged at the -vv level and above contain the device or file sending or receiving the
message, the direction it was sent, the message size, and a sequence number.  Separate
sequences are kept for incoming and outgoing messages.

The -t option is used to specify the data source type for non-file input.  If the data source is 
a serial port, the -t option must be included with either the values 2 or 4 to specify
whether it is connected to the RS232 or RS485 port.  If there is no data source specified and 
-t n is specified, semonitor.py will listen on port 22222 for a connection from an inverter.

To interact directly with an inverter over the network, semonitor.py must function as the SolarEdge
monitoring server.  This means that the host running semonitor.py must be connected to the inverter
over the ethernet interface.  In this configuration, semonitor.py may function as the DHCP server
and the DNS server to provide an IP address to the inverter and to resolve the hostname of the
SolarEdge server (usually prod.solaredge.com) to the IP address of the semonitor.py host.  This
requires that semonitor.py be run with elevated (root) priveleges in order to access the standard
DHCP and DNS ports.  The -n option specifies the name of the network interface that the inverter
is connected to.  If the inverter acquires an IP address and is able to resolve the server hostname
by some other means, the -n option is not required.

The -c, -m, and -s options are not vaild if input is from a file or stdin.

The -m option is only valid if a serial port is specified, and one or more inverter IDs
must be specified with the -s option.  If this option is specified, there cannot
be another master device on the RS485 bus.  semonintor.py will repeatedly send commands to
the specified inverters to request performance data.

The -c option may be specified for a serial device or the network.  The option specifies one
or more SolarEdge protocol command functions separated by a "/".  Each command function
consists of a hex function code followed by zero or more comma separated hex parameters.
Each parameter must begin with one of the letters "B", "H", or "L" to designate the
length of the parameter:

    B = 8 bits
    H = 16 bits
    L = 32 bits
    
All function codes and parameters must be hexadecimal numbers, without the leading "0x".
Exactly one inverter ID must be specified with the -s option.  After each command is sent,
semonitor.py will wait for a response before sending the next command.  When all commands
have been sent and responded to, the program terminates.  Responses are sent to output.

Commands initiated by semonitor.py as the result of the -c or -m options need to maintain a
monotonically increasing sequence number which is used as a transaction ID.  A file named 
seseq.dat will be created to persist the
value of this sequence number across multiple executions of semonitor.py.

### Examples
    python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json yyyymmdd.dat

Read from SE data file yyyymmdd.dat and write data to the json file yyyymmdd.json.

    python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json -m -s 7f101234,7f105678 -t 4 COM4

Function as a RS485 master to request data from the inverters 7f101234 and 7f105678
using RS485 serial port COM4.

    python semonitor.py -c 0012,H0329 -s 7f101234 -d stdout -vvv -t 2 /dev/ttyUSB0

Send a command to the inverter 7f101234 to request the value of parameter 0x0329
using RS232 serial port /dev/ttyUSB0.  Display the messages on stdout.

    python semonitor.py -c 0011,H329,L1/0012,H329/0030,H01f4,L0 -s 7f101234 -d stdout -vvv -t 2 /dev/ttyUSB0

Send commands to the inverter 7f101234 to set the value of parameter 0x0329 to 1,
followed by a command to reset the inverter using RS232 serial port /dev/ttyUSB0.
Display the debug messages on stdout.

    sudo python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json -n eth1

Start the dhcp and dns services on network interface eth1.  Accept connections
from inverters and function as a SolarEdge monitoring server.  Write performance
data to the file yyyymmdd.json.  Because the -n option is specified, the -t n option
is implied.

seextract.py
------------

Read a PCAP file that is a capture of the traffic between a inverter and the SolarEdge 
monitoring server.  Filter out the TCP stream between the inverter to the server.

### Usage 
    python seextract.py [options] pcapFile
    
### Arguments
    pcapFile        pcap file or directory to read
                    If a file is specified, the program processes the data in 
                    that file and terminates, unless the -f option is specified, 
                    in which case it waits for further data to be written to the 
                    pcap file.
                    If a directory is specified, all files in the directory are 
                    processed.
                    If a directory is specified and the -f option is specified, 
                    only the file in the directory with the newest modified date 
                    is processed and the program waits for further data in that 
                    file.  If a new file is subsequently created in the 
                    directory, the current file is closed and the new file 
                    is opened. 
### Options
    -a              append to output files
    -f              output appended data as the pcap file grows (as in tail -f)
    -o outfile      output file to write
    -s server       SolarEdge server hostname or IP address (default: 
                    prod.solaredge.com)
    -v              verbose output

### Examples
    python seextract.py -o yyyymmdd.dat yyyymmdd.pcap

Convert the data in file yyyymmdd.pcap and write the output to file yyyymmdd.dat
    
    python seextract.py -o yyyymmdd.dat -f pcap/

Monitor PCAP files in directory pcap/ and write the output to the file yyyymmdd.dat.
    
    python seextract.py -o allfiles.pcap pcap/

Convert all the pcap files found in directory pcap/ and write the output to files
allfiles.pcap.

    python seextract.py yyyymmdd.pcap | python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json

Extract SolarEdge data from the file yyyymmdd.pcap using seextract.py, process
it with semonitor.py, and write data to the json file yyyymmdd.json.

se2state.py
-----------
Maintain a JSON file containing the current state of SolarEdge inverters and optimizers.

### Usage
    python se2state.py options [inFile]
    
### Arguments
    inFile          File containing performance data in JSON format. (default:
                    stdin)
                    The program will follow (wait for new data to be written to)
                    the file.
    
### Options
    -o stateFile    File containing the current (last read) data values for each
                    inverter and optimizer values from the input file.  It will
                    be overwritten every time that new data is read.
                    
### Examples
    python semonitor.py -t n | tee yyyymmdd.json | python se2state.py -o solar.json

Accept connections from inverters over the network.  Send performance data to
the file yyyymmdd.json and also maintain the file solar.json with the current state.
The inverter acquires its IP address and resolves the server hostname by a means
other than semonitor.py.
    
se2csv.py
---------
Convert SolarEdge inverter performance monitoring data from JSON to CSV.

### Usage
    python se2csv.py options [inFile]
    
### Arguments
    inFile          File containing performance data in JSON format. (default:
                    stdin)

### Options
    -a              append to inverter and optimizer files
    -d delim        inverter and optimizer file delimiter (default: ",")
    -h              write column headers to inverter and optimizer files
    -i invFile      file to write inverter data to
    -o optFile      file to write optimizer data to
    
### Examples
    python se2csv.py -i yyyymmdd-inv.csv -o yyyymmdd-opt.csv -h yyyymmdd.json

Read from SE data file yyyymmdd.json and write inverter and optimizer data to the CSV files
yyyymmdd-inv.csv and yyyymmdd-opt.csv with headers.

Commit message:

Add semonitor -k option and sekey.py.py

README.md, after:

SolarEdge Monitoring
====================
This project enables monitoring the performance data of SolarEdge inverters and optimizers.
Solaredge supports the open Sunspec Alliance logging protocols, however this data is only 
accessible via an RS485 interface on the inverter and does not include module level (optimizer) 
data.  Solaredge publishes an API that allows access to their portal, however this 
also does not include module level data.

**semonitor.py** is a program that implements a subset of the SolarEdge protocol.  It can be 
used to parse the performance data that has been previously captured to a file, or it can 
interact directly with a SolarEdge inverter over the RS232, RS485, or ethernet interface.
Performance data is output to a file in JSON format.

**seextract.py** is a program that can extract the SolarEdge protocol messages from a PCAP
file that contains data captured from the network.

**sekey.py** is used to extract the unique encryption key from an inverter.

**se2state.py** follows a file containing JSON performance data and outputs a JSON file
that contains the current state of the inverter and optimizer values.

**se2csv.py** reads a file containing JSON performance data and outputs two separate comma delimited
files that contain inverter and optimizer data that is suitable for input to a spreadsheet.

semonitor.py
------------

SolarEdge inverter performance monitoring using the SolarEdge protocol.

### Usage 
    python semonitor.py [options] [datasource]

### Arguments
    datasource           Input filename or serial port.
                         If no data source is specified, the program reads from 
                         stdin, unless the data source type is network.
                         If a file name is specified, the program processes the 
                         data in that file and terminates, unless the -f option 
                         is specified, in which case it waits for further data 
                         to be written to the file.
                         If the data source corresponds to a serial port, 
                         process the data from that port.

### Options
    -a                   append to output file if the file exists
    -b                   baud rate for serial data source (default: 115200)
    -c cmd[/cmd/...]     send the specified command functions
    -d debugfile         where to send debug messages (stdout|syslog|filename) 
                         (default: syslog)
    -f                   wait for appended data as the input file grows 
                         (as in tail -f)
    -k keyfile           file containing a hex encoded encryption key
    -m                   function as a RS485 master
    -n interface         run DHCP and DNS network services on the specified 
                         interface
    -o outfile           write performance data to the specified file in 
                         JSON format (default: stdout)
    -r recfile           file to record all incoming and outgoing messages to
    -s inv[,inv,...]     comma delimited list of SolarEdge slave inverter IDs
    -t 2|4|n             data source type (2=RS232, 4=RS485, n=network)
    -v                   verbose output
    -x                   halt on data exception

### Notes
Data may be read from a file containing messages in the SolarEdge protocol that was previously created by 
seextract.py from a pcap file, or the output from a previous run of semonitor.py.  It may also be
read in real time from one of the RS232, RS485, or ethernet interfaces on a SolarEdge inverter.

Debug messages are sent to the system log, unless the -d option is specified.  If an error occurs
while processing data, the program will log a message and continue unless the -x option is
specified.

The level of debug messaging is controlled using the -v option, which may be specified up to
4 times:

    -v      log input parameters and file operations
    -vv     log incoming and outgoing messages
    -vvv    log the parsed data of incoming and outgoing messages
    -vvvv   log the raw data of incoming and outgoing messages
    
Messages logged at the -vv level and above contain the device or file sending or receiving the
message, the direction it was sent, the message size, and a sequence number.  Separate
sequences are kept for incoming and outgoing messages.

The -t option is used to specify the data source type for non-file input.  If the data source is 
a serial port, the -t option must be included with either the values 2 or 4 to specify
whether it is connected to the RS232 or RS485 port.  If there is no data source specified and 
-t n is specified, semonitor.py will listen on port 22222 for a connection from an inverter.

To interact directly with an inverter over the network, semonitor.py must function as the SolarEdge
monitoring server.  This means that the host running semonitor.py must be connected to the inverter
over the ethernet interface.  In this configuration, semonitor.py may function as the DHCP server
and the DNS server to provide an IP address to the inverter and to resolve the hostname of the
SolarEdge server (usually prod.solaredge.com) to the IP address of the semonitor.py host.  This
requires that semonitor.py be run with elevated (root) priveleges in order to access the standard
DHCP and DNS ports.  The -n option specifies the name of the network interface that the inverter
is connected to.  If the inverter acquires an IP address and is able to resolve the server hostname
by some other means, the -n option is not required.

The -c, -m, and -s options are not vaild if input is from a file or stdin.

The -m option is only valid if a serial port is specified, and one or more inverter IDs
must be specified with the -s option.  If this option is specified, there cannot
be another master device on the RS485 bus.  semonintor.py will repeatedly send commands to
the specified inverters to request performance data.

The -c option may be specified for a serial device or the network.  The option specifies one
or more SolarEdge protocol command functions separated by a "/".  Each command function
consists of a hex function code followed by zero or more comma separated hex parameters.
Each parameter must begin with one of the letters "B", "H", or "L" to designate the
length of the parameter:

    B = 8 bits
    H = 16 bits
    L = 32 bits
    
All function codes and parameters must be hexadecimal numbers, without the leading "0x".
Exactly one inverter ID must be specified with the -s option.  After each command is sent,
semonitor.py will wait for a response before sending the next command.  When all commands
have been sent and responded to, the program terminates.  Responses are sent to output.

Commands initiated by semonitor.py as the result of the -c or -m options need to maintain a
monotonically increasing sequence number which is used as a transaction ID.  A file named 
seseq.dat will be created to persist the
value of this sequence number across multiple executions of semonitor.py.

### Examples
    python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json yyyymmdd.dat

Read from SE data file yyyymmdd.dat and write data to the json file yyyymmdd.json.

    python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json -m -s 7f101234,7f105678 -t 4 COM4

Function as a RS485 master to request data from the inverters 7f101234 and 7f105678
using RS485 serial port COM4.

    python semonitor.py -c 0012,H0329 -s 7f101234 -d stdout -vvv -t 2 /dev/ttyUSB0

Send a command to the inverter 7f101234 to request the value of parameter 0x0329
using RS232 serial port /dev/ttyUSB0.  Display the messages on stdout.

    python semonitor.py -c 0011,H329,L1/0012,H329/0030,H01f4,L0 -s 7f101234 -d stdout -vvv -t 2 /dev/ttyUSB0

Send commands to the inverter 7f101234 to set the value of parameter 0x0329 to 1,
followed by a command to reset the inverter using RS232 serial port /dev/ttyUSB0.
Display the debug messages on stdout.

    sudo python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json -n eth1

Start the dhcp and dns services on network interface eth1.  Accept connections
from inverters and function as a SolarEdge monitoring server.  Write performance
data to the file yyyymmdd.json.  Because the -n option is specified, the -t n option
is implied.

seextract.py
------------

Read a PCAP file that is a capture of the traffic between a inverter and the SolarEdge 
monitoring server.  Filter out the TCP stream between the inverter to the server.

### Usage 
    python seextract.py [options] pcapFile
    
### Arguments
    pcapFile        pcap file or directory to read
                    If a file is specified, the program processes the data in 
                    that file and terminates, unless the -f option is specified, 
                    in which case it waits for further data to be written to the 
                    pcap file.
                    If a directory is specified, all files in the directory are 
                    processed.
                    If a directory is specified and the -f option is specified, 
                    only the file in the directory with the newest modified date 
                    is processed and the program waits for further data in that 
                    file.  If a new file is subsequently created in the 
                    directory, the current file is closed and the new file 
                    is opened. 
### Options
    -a              append to output files
    -f              output appended data as the pcap file grows (as in tail -f)
    -o outfile      output file to write
    -s server       SolarEdge server hostname or IP address (default: 
                    prod.solaredge.com)
    -v              verbose output

### Examples
    python seextract.py -o yyyymmdd.dat yyyymmdd.pcap

Convert the data in file yyyymmdd.pcap and write the output to file yyyymmdd.dat
    
    python seextract.py -o yyyymmdd.dat -f pcap/

Monitor PCAP files in directory pcap/ and write the output to the file yyyymmdd.dat.
    
    python seextract.py -o allfiles.pcap pcap/

Convert all the pcap files found in directory pcap/ and write the output to files
allfiles.pcap.

    python seextract.py yyyymmdd.pcap | python semonitor.py -o yyyymmdd.json

Extract SolarEdge data from the file yyyymmdd.pcap using seextract.py, process
it with semonitor.py, and write data to the json file yyyymmdd.json.

se2state.py
-----------
Maintain a JSON file containing the current state of SolarEdge inverters and optimizers.

### Usage
    python se2state.py options [inFile]
    
### Arguments
    inFile          File containing performance data in JSON format. (default:
                    stdin)
                    The program will follow (wait for new data to be written to)
                    the file.
    
### Options
    -o stateFile    File containing the current (last read) data values for each
                    inverter and optimizer values from the input file.  It will
                    be overwritten every time that new data is read.
                    
### Examples
    python semonitor.py -t n | tee yyyymmdd.json | python se2state.py -o solar.json

Accept connections from inverters over the network.  Send performance data to
the file yyyymmdd.json and also maintain the file solar.json with the current state.
The inverter acquires its IP address and resolves the server hostname by a means
other than semonitor.py.
    
sekey.py
-----------
Maintain a JSON file containing the current state of SolarEdge inverters and optimizers.

### Usage
    python sekey.py options [inFile]
    
### Arguments
    inFile          File containing the values of the 4 encryption key parameters
                    of an inverter output from semonitor.py. (default: stdin)
    
### Options
    -o keyFile      File containing the hex encoded key. (Default: stdout)
                    
### Examples
    python solaredge/semonitor.py -c 12,H239/12,H23a/12,H23b/12,H23c -s 7f101234 -t 2  /dev/ttyUSB0|python solaredge/sekey.py -o 7f101234.key

Read the parameters 0x0239-0x023c and write the key value to the file 7f101234.key.
    
se2csv.py
---------
Convert SolarEdge inverter performance monitoring data from JSON to CSV.

### Usage
    python se2csv.py options [inFile]
    
### Arguments
    inFile          File containing performance data in JSON format. (default:
                    stdin)

### Options
    -a              append to inverter and optimizer files
    -d delim        inverter and optimizer file delimiter (default: ",")
    -h              write column headers to inverter and optimizer files
    -i invFile      file to write inverter data to
    -o optFile      file to write optimizer data to
    
### Examples
    python se2csv.py -i yyyymmdd-inv.csv -o yyyymmdd-opt.csv -h yyyymmdd.json

Read from SE data file yyyymmdd.json and write inverter and optimizer data to the CSV files
yyyymmdd-inv.csv and yyyymmdd-opt.csv with headers.
